---
title: "Why CHICKEN Scheme?"
date: 2022-05-18
tags: Scheme Chicken-Scheme matrico
---

## Why is `matrico` developed in the CHICKEN Scheme Scheme dialect?

[Chicken Scheme](https://call-cc.org) is an implementation of the R5RS Scheme
programming language, and provides both, a read-eval-print-loop (REPL),
the Chicken Scheme Interpreter `csi`, and also an optimizing compiler, the
Chicken Scheme Compiler `csc`.

_Chicken Scheme_ states that it follows ideas from the research paper:

H.G. Baker: "[CONS Should Not CONS Its Arguments, Part II: Cheney on the M.T.A.](https://web.archive.org/web/20200223051632/http://home.pipeline.com/~hbaker1/CheneyMTA.html)"; ACM Sigplan Notices 30(9): 17--20, 1995.

and aims to be "a practical and portable Scheme system".

When I was seeking a suitable Scheme for implementing `matrico`, I had the
following wish list:

* **Open Source** For long-term and widespread availability, the Scheme system
  has to be released under an open-source license and part of a major Linux
  distribution's repositories.

* **R5RS** A mere fifty pages defining a complete programming language holds its
  own minimalistic appeal.

* **Modules** To bundle function libraries, organize library hierarchies, and
  control accessibility of library elements, modules are required.

* **Homogenous Vectors (SRFI-4)** Particularly, vectors solely composed of
  double-precision floating-point numbers (f64) are essential for numerical
  computations.

* **Cross-platform (X86 & ARM)** While X86(-64) dominates the desktop and laptop
  market, ARM(64) systems, like Apple's M1 and the Raspberry Pi 4B, became very
  attractive efficiency- and performance-wise.

* **Typed math (fixnum & flonum)** For performance and code readability the
  two most relevant number systems, exact integers (fixnums) and inexact
  floating-point numbers (flonums) should have respective math functions.

_Chicken Scheme_ provided all of the above, so it became my Scheme of choice.
Additionally, once I familiarized myself with _Chicken Scheme_ environment, I
got to know the following features, which turned out to provide bonus value:

* **Chicken Base** This included module provides most generic functions you
  could miss from plain R5RS.

* **Included Modules** The extend and content of the included modules is
  straight out fantastic.

* **Extension Repository** _Chicken Scheme_ has a central repository for
  extensions packaged in the "egg" format, which is itself pretty awesome.

* **Documentation** Be it the included modules or the egg extensions, everything
  is very well documented.

* **Functors** A very interesting feature of Chicken's module system are
  functors, which allow to parameterize a module by another module.

* **Profiling** It turns out _Chicken Scheme_ has statistical and
  instrumentation profilers included.

Working for about one year with _Chicken Scheme_, I can say have never had a
more joyful and satisfying programming experience. That is not to say
_Chicken Scheme_ is perfect, but in comparison the issues I encovered are minor;
and I will discuss those further down the road. For now, and in brief: writing
`matrico` in _Chicken Scheme_ was and is fun. And next, I will lay out
`matrico`'s structure.

